MACROECONOMIC INSIGHT: THE STORY BEHIND ZAMBIA'S CURRENCY DEPRECIATION AND SOLUTIONS TO ZAMBIAS ACCUMULATED EXTERNAL DEBTS.

Currency depreciation is defined as a decline of a currency’s value relative to another currency. currency deprciation can lead to inflationary pressure, affect the economic growth of the country, increase the cost of servicing debt and raise the cost of doing business for companies.Currently the zambian kwacha is the worst performing currency in the continent of Africa, therefore this has raised many concerns on the general public at large in as much as citizens are expressing their anxiety to understand the major reasons to why the currency is depreciating. On the other hand since 2011 after the General elections, the Zambian government has been considered on the list of 25 developing countries with low income that are considered at high risk of external debts. By the end of December 2019, Zambia’s external debt was at US $ 11.2 billion, while domestic arrears were at K 26.2 billion at end of September. In contrast in 2011, external debt stood at US $ 3.2 billion while domestic arrears were at K 15.1 billion, this means that in the last decade the country has added US $ 8 billion and K 11. 1 billion to the stock of external and domestic debts respectively. therefore, during the period 2011 to 2020 which is accounting to almost a decade, Zambia has encounterd the aforementioned obstacles in its prospect for economic growth as well as an injury on its target of becoming a middle -income country by 2030. furthermore, this article aims on highlighting the major macroeconomic factors that are contributing to kwacha depreciation and the solutions to our increased external debt portfolios.

DEBT SERVICING.

A eurobond is defined as an international bond issued that is denominated in a currency not native to the country where it is issued. Zambia has to date issued three Eurobonds amounting to US$750 million in 2012, US$1 billion in 2014 which are due to be paid in 2022 , 2024, respectively, while the US$1.25 billion issued in 2015 will be due for repayment in 2027. therefore, from the aforementioned eurobonds with the help of the above defination you can notice that Zambia has been issuing debts denominated in dollars, therefore servicing these eurobonds require our Zambian government to pay them back in the same denomination which is in dollars, which in return reduce the stock of dollars in our reserves, however this equally reduces the number of dollar holders at household and firm level, which in the long run bring about the deprciation of our kwacha against the dollar since the two currencies are not in positive correlation at foreign exchange market (FOREX).

TRADE DEFICIT.

Trade Deficit is the situation in the economy where there are more imports than exports. In most developing countries like zambia there are high levels of good importation than exports, this results in the excessive outflow of dollars from our Zambia's monetary system therefore this it in return weakens the kwacha so as to enable the kwacha against dollar ratio attain its equilibrium or stability level. With this our current situation, Kwacha has attained its equilibrium level at k15- k16 against 1$ which we can reduce by means of monetary tightening policies and other implementations by central bank.

LOW POWER SUPPLY DEFICITS.

Zambia has witnessed another electricity supply dwindle due to the low water levels at hydropower dams as a severe drought sweeps through southern Africa for the second time in less than 5 years. Therefore, this has increased the cost of production among the well performing industries in the country of which mining sector is inclusive. Mine production constitutes the backbone of the zambian economy and if there is any disruption in its production system the end results on the economy are negatively affective. Since the time Zambia experienced the load shedding there has been the reduction in the production of stocks by many firms that export various goods and copper inclusive, therefore less productivity means less inflow of dollars in our monetary system which in the long run weakens the kwacha against dollar since we dont have many dollars to participate on FOREX in our reserves at central Bank.

US-CHINA TRADE WAR.

US-CHINA trade war is an ongoing economic conflict between the world's two largest national economies, China and the United States. President Donald Trump in 2018 began setting tariffs and other trade barriers on China with the goal of forcing it to make changes to what the U.S. says are "unfair trade practices''. This trade barriers of Trumps governance against china has brought about many distress on small economies such as Zambia, due to this Trade war, china stopped producing more of its products that are exported to US therefore as the result of this factor, china equally reduced its apetite of importing raw materials such as copper from Zambia, this ultimately cut off the movement of dollars from US to CHINA then ZAMBIA, as the result Zambia stopped recieving excessive dollars from China like before which later struck our economy and made kwacha depreciate even more.

CORONA VIRUS.

😂😂 let me take this opportunity to explain well on this point so as to make it clear to all my facebook family.
Corona Virus is not the reason to why Zambia's kwacha has depreciated however it is just one of the factors that have contributed to stimulate the already depreciating kwacha, but how ? remember, most airports are closed, no entry and no exit, most ports are closed, tourists are restricted to movement, no revenue in dollars for zambia from tourisim sector and furthermore no exports to most of our trading partners. therefore corona virus according to Chilufya tayali yes is one of the cobtributing factors to why the kwacha has depreciated.

SOLUTIONS TO EXTERNAL DEBTS

Zambia’s debt problems have kept on increasing therefore there should be the keenest attention on available options for Zambia to solve these debt challenges. During January-June 2019, the authorities of the Zambian government planned to spend K 4.2 billion on domestic debt repayment but they only managed to spend 2.4 % less at K 4.1 billion, furthermore the external debts repayments escalated by 40.4 % from K 3. 1 billion to K 5.2 billion which increased the unplanned expenditures, below are the solutions to external debts.

RESTRUCTURING DEBT MANAGEMENT CAPACITY.

The Zambian government should engage the depth level of debt managements system by recruiting adequate qualified staffs so as to restructure and reschedule the debts in order to reduce the external debt stocks. This dynamism should identify and outline the procedures, guidelines and predetermined options on the amount, type, how, when and from whom the debt is to be obtained. Furthermore, through this initiative the Zambian government should embrace the drastic increase in demand of domestic financing and concessional external debts which are cheap and associated with less risks for a developing nation like Zambia to meet the obligations. This initiative will in the long run restructure the Zambian debt portfolio by lowering the proportion of obtaining an external non-concessional debt from 55% to 40% and increase the domestic debts from 45% to 60 %.Furthermore, it will equally increase the participation of the general public in the financial markets especially on the government securities such as Treasury Bills and government bonds.
Ideally, the promotion of domestic debts also aims on reducing the foreign currency denominations which brings about kwacha depreciation as the result of foreign exchange exposure and decreases the potential market mismatches. The existence of a well domestic securities market reduces over reliance of participation in the international bond market, this in the long run helps the diversification of the financial system by insulating the economy from vulnerability to financial crisis and from a credit crunch.

INSTITUTING GOVERNMENT SPENDING CUT.

Furthermore, the other available option remaining for Zambia to solve its external debts is for authorities to outload the austerity measures by reducing the fiscal vulnerability such as large deficits and inefficient government spending. Zambian government urgently needs to reduce its fiscal deficits by cutting some expenditures that are currently not needed in order for the unplanned expenditure to meet the planned expenditure of the national budget, these costs includes the restriction of unnecessary travels of the state officials, subsidies for fuel, emergency power and others, by so doing Zambia will create enough room for increased level of private sector financing and investment and reduce the reliance on external debts. Furthermore, finances of the budget should be invested in areas that can support economic diversification and future growth prospects. Additionally, based on empirical evidence, in 1990s Canada managed to reduce its fiscal deficit to zero when it almost experienced a double-digit percentage in its fiscal deficit and by cutting 20% of the budget for four consecutive years.

INTEREST RATE MANIPULATION.

Lowering interest rates is another available option that the Zambian government can engage in order to lessen the burden of external debt distress. This can stimulate the generation of taxes in the long run that the government can use to reduce on fiscal deficits. Lowering interest rates attract many prospectors’ investors that can borrow money and spend it on goods and services which can create more jobs and tax revenue in the long run and ultimately provide the government with much liquidity to cover necessary national expenses.

NEGOTIATIONS WITH BILATERAL PARTNERS

The other best option that the Zambian government can engage to solve the challenges of external debts is by considering negotiations with its developed bilateral partners like China towards the reprofiling of some of the external debts and writing off some debts like the recent US $ 22 million and US $ 70 million.This will create enough fiscal space for Zambia to make other Eurobond external repayments.